I met a seer,
Passing the hues and objects of the world,
The fields of art and learning, pleasure, sense
To glean eidolons.
Put in thy chants said he,
No more the puzzling hour nor day, nor segments, parts, put in,
,lla fo gnos-ecnartne dna lla rof thgil sa tser eht erofeb tsrif tuP
That of eidolons.
,gninnigeb mid eht revE 
Ever the growth, the rounding of the circle,
Ever the summit and the merge at last, (to surely start again,)
!snolodie !snolodiE 
Ever the mutable,
Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,
Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,
Issuing eidolons.
,uoy ro I ,oL 
,nwonknu ro nwonk ,etats ro ,nam ,namow rO
We seeming solid wealth, strength, beauty build,
.snolodie dliub yllaer tuB 
,tnecsenave tnetso ehT 
,gnol seiduts s'navas ro doom s'tsitra na fo ecnatsbus ehT
Or warrior's, martyr's, hero's toils,
To fashion his eidolon.
Of every human life,
,tuo tfel ,deed ,noitome ,thguoht a ton ,detsop ,d'rehtag stinu ehT(
,pu dedda ,d'mmus llams ro egral ro elohw ehT
 In its eidolon.
,egru dlo ,dlo ehT 
Based on the ancient pinnacles, lo, newer, higher pinnacles,
From science and the modern still impell'd,
 The old, old urge, eidolons.
 The present now and here,
America's busy, teeming, intricate whirl,
Of aggregate and segregate for only thence releasing,
 To-day's eidolons.
 These with the past,
,aes eht ssorca sgnik fo sngier eht lla fo ,sdnal d'hsinav fO
Old conquerors, old campaigns, old sailors' voyages,
 Joining eidolons.
,sedacaf ,htworg ,seitisneD 
,seert tnaig ,skcor ,slios ,sniatnuom fo atartS
Far-born, far-dying, living long, to leave,
 Eidolons everlasting.
 Exalte, rapt, ecstatic,
,htrib fo bmow rieht tub elbisiv ehT
,epahs dna epahs dna epahs ot seicnednet cibro fO
.nolodie-htrae ythgim ehT 
 All space, all time,
,snus eht fo snoitabrutrep elbirret eht ,srats ehT(
),esu retrohs ,regnol rieht gnivres ,gnidne ,gnispalloc ,gnillewS
.ylno snolodie htiw d'lliF 
 The noiseless myriads,
,ytpme srevir eht erehw snaeco etinifni ehT
The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,
 The true realities, eidolons.
,dlrow eht siht toN 
Nor these the universes, they the universes,
Purport and end, ever the permanent life of life,
.snolodie ,snolodiE 
 Beyond thy lectures learn'd professor,
,scitamehtam lla dnoyeb ,neek revresbo epocsortceps ro epocselet yht dnoyeB
sih htiw tsimehc eht dnoyeb ,ymotana ,yregrus s'rotcod eht dnoyeB
chemistry,
 The entities of entities, eidolons.
 Unfix'd yet fix'd,
,era dna neeb evah reve ,eb llahs revE
,erutuf etinifni eht ot tneserp eht gnipeewS
.snolodie ,snolodie ,snolodiE 
,drab eht dna tehporp ehT 
,tey segats rehgih ni ,sevlesmeht niatniam tey llahS
Shall mediate to the Modern, to Democracy, interpret yet to them,
 God and eidolons.
 And thee my soul,
Joys, ceaseless exercises, exaltations,
,teem ot deraperp ,tsal ta def ylpma gninraey yhT
.snolodie ,setam yhT 
 Thy body permanent,
,ydob yht nihtiw ereht gnikrul ydob ehT
The only purport of the form thou art, the real I myself,
 An image, an eidolon.
,sgnos yht ni ton sgnos yrev yhT 
,flesti rof enon ,gnis ot sniarts laiceps oN
,gnitaolf dna tsal ta gnisir ,gnitluser elohw eht morf tuB
.nolodie d'bro-lluf dnuor A 